Good labour relations are essential to
good human resources management.
It is your responsibility to contribute
to effective labour relations in your
organization and to ensure that the
Federal Public Sector Labour Relations Act,
labour relations policies and collective
agreements, and the National Joint Council
directives are respected and
applied in a consistent manner.
The Federal Public Sector Labour Relations Act
provides for dialogue, joint problem solving,
mutually agreed-upon solutions,
and effective collective bargaining.
The preamble of the Act outlines key values
and principles, such as the importance of
mutual respect and harmonious labour-management
relations to support a healthy
and productive workplace;
serving and protecting the public interest, and
fair, credible and efficient resolution
of workplace issues.
Under the Federal Public Sector
Labour Relations Act, deputy heads must
establish labour-management consultation
committees and informal conflict
management systems (or ICMS).
In this section you will become familiar
with the basic process for determining
a managerial or confidential position,
learn how to use collective agreements
to make decisions, and discover the
resources available to help you
manage workplace conflict.
This section should take you
approximately 20 minutes to complete.
Essential positions are defined as
jobs that maintain the services,
facilities and activities of the
federal public service and that are
or will be necessary for the safety
or security of the public.
Under the Federal Public Sector Labour
Relations Act (Division 8), the employer
holds the authority and responsibility
for determining essential positions.
As a delegated manager, you are responsible
for identifying the positions that
include duties which are necessary
to providing essential services,
providing rationales and supporting
documentation (such as organizational charts
and work descriptions) in support of
designations to your labour relations
organizational advisor, and
after a position has been designated,
notifying the incumbent about the
related implications -
a notice that may be sent by email.
For more information, see the
Guidelines for Essential Services Designations.
Having managerial or confidential duties
means that these positions are excluded
from a bargaining unit. Section 59 of the
Federal Public Sector Labour Relations Act
lists the grounds for declaring a position
managerial or confidential, but departments
play a key role in identifying and
justifying these positions to the
Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat.
For more information, see the Guidelines
on Managerial or Confidential Exclusions.
Collective agreements specify the terms
and conditions governing employee
and employer rights and entitlements.
They also address key elements such as
leave entitlements, hours of work,
remuneration, and so forth.
Different collective agreements may
appear to be quite similar, but they
contain important differences in
entitlements that you must recognize.
In your new role as a manager, it is quite
possible that you will manage employees
under more than one collective agreement.
Make sure you read them and are able
to answer questions that may arise
among your employees.
You should also be aware that directives
developed by the National Joint Council
affect collective agreements.
National Joint Council provisions form
part of the collective agreements
of the participating parties under
the bylaws of the National Joint Council.
The provisions also apply to individuals
not covered by collective agreements,
such as specified in the directive
or by employer policy.
The Financial Administration Act
authorizes every deputy head in the
core public administration to establish
standards of conduct and to set penalties
as disciplinary measures.
Penalties that may be applied
for misconduct include suspension
or termination of employment,
oral or written reprimands,
demotion to a position at a lower maximum
rate of pay, or other financial penalties.
Disciplinary measures, as opposed to
performance management measures,
may be the appropriate response to
an employee’s willful breach of
rules or standards in the workplace.
A grievance is a formal administrative
process that employees can use to seek
the resolution of disputes regarding
the terms and conditions of their employment.
The Federal Public Sector Labour Relations Act
gives all employees the right to
present grievances, unless there is
an administrative alternative.
Employees are entitled to present
a grievance if they feel aggrieved
by the interpretation or application of
statutes, regulations, directions or
other instruments that deal with
terms and conditions of employment,
by a provision of a collective agreement
or an arbitral award, or
as a result of any occurrence or matter affecting
their terms and conditions of employment .
When you receive a grievance from an employee,
it is your responsibility as a supervisor or manager
to acknowledge receipt to the employee and
send the grievance form to the person in your
organization who is authorized
to deal with the grievance.
According to the Federal Public Sector
Labour Relations Act,  all organizations in the
core public administration must have an
informal conflict management system in place.
The purpose of an ICMS is to resolve
workplace conflict by offering
alternative dispute resolution methods.
Take what you have learned into real life!
Your organization will have its own ways of
doing things. Take a time out from the course
to find out who in your department is
the labour relations advisor.  They can offer
excellent support.  As well, find out which positions
are designated managerial or confidential
in your team or organization.
Test your knowledge by answering
the following questions.
Select “Submit” when you are done.